Now if we speak about authentication let's have a look at our current implementation because on the
back end here we got a log in route right.
We can log in.
We can send the request to the log in route at least.
But if we then have a look at our users controller and there at the log and function we see that what
we do in there isn't the end very very trivial.
We check whether we find a user for the provided email address and then if we don't find that user or
if de password off the user does not match the entered password we return an error.
Now thus far does logic isn't too wrong though I'm not happy with storing the plain password like this
the plaintext password like this in the database.
We certainly one changed this but still even with that logic would you return is is not really helpful.
I return a user object and I return a message where I say locked in.
This is not really anything that helps us on the front end.
It's not a proof that this user is locked in and right the server servers say so.
OK.
That is nice but if we did in the future send requests from the front end to the back end.
How exactly would we remind the server about the fact that the user in our front end is logged in.
We get no data from the server which we could send back to the server to prove that the server in the
past decided that we are logged in.
So how would this normally work and how is should this work in a single page application REST API scenario.
We have our ReACT app and we got our back and server and there we got certain routes were certain requests
we accept we use agent be client on the front end like the fetch API or like access and we send requests
to the back end and summer outs there should be protected which means only authenticated users should
have access and our routes are open to everyone.
Now traditionally and with that I mean web application where we render H terminal on the server with
the help of templating engines.
Traditionally we would establish a session we would create a session on the server a session is a server
side idea which we Indians store in the database there and we would send the session ideas to the front
end and they're stored in a cookie.
Now this approach is generally nice but if we're having a single page application and then a server
side API these two ends are not as closely connected as they are in an application where the server
side renders SDH HTML code to be precise the API is stateless which means it's totally decoupled from
the front end it doesn't want to remember sessions and to which front end a session belong and so on.
Instead we'll use a different approach when we're working with a single page application on the front
end and API like a rest api on the back end instead of creating and storing such a session on the server
which we don't want because the server is stateless we generate a token does in the end is a string
generated with a certain algorithm whereas certain pieces of data are encoded in this token is returned
to the front end and there it can be stored in a cookie or in local storage.
Now this token then can be attached by the front end to requests dad request protected resources and
now the interesting thing is the server generates this token as I said with a certain algorithm and
also by using a private key which again is just a string that's fed into the algorithm and the same
key for the same data which is encoded will always yield the same token a different key with the same
data will yield a different token.
So the server is the only one who knows this private key which in the end led to this exact token and
therefore the server is able to validate the token which is attached to an incoming request.
So on the front end if you try to fake a token if you would try to change anything there you don't know
the private key so you will get a different token and such a token would be identified as invalid by
the server.
And with this approach we don't need to store any data on the server except for days private key because
we then on the server know which tokens makes sense for this provided private key and on the front that
we can use this token to attach it to requests where we need to identify ourselves as authenticated.
That's the idea here data is how authentication typically works in modern web applications where we
have a single page application and the API back and talk to each other.
And this is the approach we will therefore also implement in this course.